# ISCC Decentralized Content Registry

| IEP:      | 0013                                        |
|-----------|---------------------------------------------|
| Title:    | ISCC Decentralized Content Registry         |
| Author:   | Titusz Pan <tp@iscc.io>             |
| Comments: | https://github.com/iscc/iscc-ieps/issues/18 |
| Status:   | DRAFT                                       |
| Type:     | Core                                        |
| License:  | CC-BY-4.0                                   |
| Created:  | {{ git_creation_date_localized }}           |
| Updated:  | {{ git_revision_date_localized }}           |

## Status of This Document

This document is a draft of a potential specification. It has no official standing of any kind and
does not represent the support or consensus of any standards organization.

## Introduction

The purpose of a decentralized content registry is to connect Actors to Digital Content in a
permissionless decentralized environment and provide a global and verifiable data space for content
identification and matching.

Actors authenticate themselves with their blockchain accounts which they use to sign ISCC-CODE
declarations (ledger transactions). Digital Content is identified by ISCC-CODEs. The ISCC-ID is 
derived from an ISCC-CODE, a blockchain account and the history of previous declarations. ISCC-IDs 
are  globally unique, persistent, authenticated, and resolve to at least exactly one ISCC-CODE and 
a blockchain account. The ISCC-IDs are not required to be generated or stored on the participating 
ledgers. ISCC-IDs are the result of processing the history of transactions according to the Minting 
Protocol.

## Protocol Overview

The protocol to declare an ISCC-CODE and trigger the minting of an ISCC-ID is divided into 3 parts,
the Declaration Protocol, the Minting Protocol and the Resolution Protocol. 

1. The declaration protocol defines how an ISCC-CODE has to be written to a ledger to become a valid input for the off-chain minting protocol. 
2. The minting protocol defines how a legers history has to be parsed to mint a valid ISCC-ID
3. The resolution protocol defines how an ISCC resolver answers queries about ISCC-CODEs and ISCC-ID.

## Declaration Protocol

To participate in the ISCC declaration protocol, a ledger MUST establish exactly one globally
unique Ledger-ID (Variable Length Integer) that will be used as a prefix for ISCC-IDs that are
minted from its ISCC declarations. 

!!! note
    An ISCC-ID comes into existence only after an ISCC declaration has been confirmed on a ledger that participates in the protocol. 

The following minimal information (Declaration-Set) MUST be provided and made publicly available
for a valid ISCC declaration:

1. An ISCC-CODE (a valid sequence of ISCC-UNITs)
2. A blockchain account (actors identifier) of the declaring party 
3. A valid signature of the declaring party (transaction signature)

We define the party that signs the ISCC declaration as the DECLARER. 

!!! note
    The DECLARER is merely the controller of the ISCC-ID minted from the declaration. The declarer
    is not required to be the creator or a rights-holder of the declared digital content.

An ISCC declaration MAY additionally include:

1. A link to external metadata as defined by [IEP-0012 - ISCC Metadata](iep-0012.md)
2. A processing instruction for the minting protocol 

The on-chain link to ISCC metadata SHOULD point to a public and integrity preserving resource (e.g. IPFS CID or a 
hashlink URI). Permissioned, confidential or mutable data SHOULD be referenced from ISCC metadata
via URI.

A ledger that wants to accept ISCC declarations and trigger the minting of valid ISCC-IDs MUST
fulfill the following minimum requirements:

1. The ledger must provide an immutable, complete, time-ordered, append-only sequence of transactions.
2. The legers transaction format must allow for embedding and signing the data required for an ISCC declarations.
3. The Declaration-Set MUST be publicly readable (permisionless).
4. ISCC declarations on the ledger MAY be write-permissioned.

A participating ledger or framework MUST provide documentaation of its implementation of the declaration protocol.

1. The documentation MUST specify how ISCC declarations can be parsed to decode the Declaration-Set
2. The documentation MUST provide sufficient information to the public such that third parties can independently verify transactions signatures and implement the Minting Protocol
3. The documentation MUST define how a public observer can distinguish between a transaction that declares an ISCC-CODE and other unrelated transactions.

## Minting Protocol

TBD

## Resolution Protocol

TBD

## Reference Implementation

- ISCC-ID construction: https://github.com/iscc/iscc-core/blob/main/iscc_core/iscc_id.py
- EVM registry: https://github.com/iscc/iscc-evm
- EVM observer: https://github.com/iscc/iscc-observer-evm
- ISCC-ID resolver: https://github.com/iscc/iscc-registry
