# ISCC DID Method

| IEP:      | 0015                                        |
|-----------|---------------------------------------------|
| Title:    | ISCC DID Method                             |
| Author:   | Titusz Pan <tp@iscc.foundation>             |
| Comments: | https://github.com/iscc/iscc-ieps/issues/20 |
| Status:   | DRAFT                                       |
| Type:     | Core                                        |
| License:  | CC-BY-4.0                                   |
| Created:  | {{ git_creation_date_localized }}           |
| Updated:  | {{ git_revision_date_localized }}           |


## Status of This Document

This document is a draft of a potential specification. It has no official standing of any kind and
does not represent the support or consensus of any standards organization.

## Introduction

### Motivation

The need for a universal identifier for digital content has emerged as an increasing amount of
dynamic, short-lived and granular digital content is produced, consumed and processed. Commercial
interests of many stakeholders depend on proper identification of digital content.

Professionally produced digital content but also semi-professional and user-generated content are
the currency of the information age. A variety of specific content identifier standards already 
exist, but a universal content-dependent identifier for digital media has not yet been developed.

In particular, the structure and management of identifiers for digital content have a substantial
impact on the level of possible adoption, automation, and the potential for machine-to-machine 
communication and innovation within and across different industry sectors.

Digital content is dynamic, always in motion, and acted upon globally by a variety of entities with 
different interests and requirements. Digital content continuously re-encodes, resizes, and 
re-compresses, changing its underlying data as it travels through a complex network of actors and 
systems. These circumstances require a special design for a universal identifier that is capable
of searching and matching transcoded or otherwise similar content on a global scale.

### The ISCC 

The ISCC (International Standard Content Code) is a universal and open identification system for
text, audio, image, and video based content. ISCC-CODEs can be created from media assets by anybody
using open source software. Similar content can then be matched by comparing ISCC-CODEs only.

!!! example "Example ISCC-CODE"
    ```
    ISCC:KECYCPU3OKIUDZ7TYBRK5HZ4JGPTILLAT2IW7TY7EYIJI4QSK5I353I
    Decoded: ISCC-IMAGE-V0-MCDI-813e9b729141e7f3c062ae9f3c499f342d609e916fcf1f26109472125751beed
    ```

Users can also register ISCC-CODEs on any supported public blockchain to obtain a short and globaly
unique ISCC-ID. The ISCC-ID is under the control of the registrant and resolves to an ISCC-CODE, 
on-chain metadata and optional off-chain metadata. ISCC-IDs are globaly unique even if the same
ISCC-CODE is registered multiple times by different entities. An ISCC-ID is minted 
deterministically by observing participating legers and can be reproduced by anybody who observes 
the public and immutable registration events.

!!! example "Example ISCC-ID"
    ```
    ISCC:MIAGWPTV4J2Z57CI
    Decoded: ID-ETHEREUM-V0-64-6b3e75e2759efc48
    ```

### ISCC as DID

The ISCC DID method creates a mechanism to reference digital content with a globaly unique
persistent identifier that does not require a centralized registration authority. Instead, the
ISCC system defines an open and voluntary cross-chain registration protocol using cryptography and
distributed ledger technology.

Integrating ISCC with the DID system improves ISCC interoperability. DID documents provide
standardized ways to discover [services](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#services) related to the
referenced content and its registrant.

[Verifiable credentials](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/) discovered through the DID document 
`service` property can improve trust in otherwise permissionless content registrations. Additionaly
the use of [decentralized web nodes](https://identity.foundation/decentralized-web-node/spec/) allow
for interoperable discovery and data sovereignity of hosted verifiable credentials.

At the samme time ISCC would bring open content identification to the *Decentalized Identifiers* 
ecosystem.

## Method Syntax

### Method Name

1. The name that shall identify this DID method is: `iscc`.
2. A DID that uses this method MUST begin with the following prefix: `did:iscc:`.
3. According to the DID specification, this string MUST be in lowercase.

### Method Specific Identifier

The ISCC DID scheme conforms to the [DID Syntax](https://w3c.github.io/did-core/#did-syntax) and is
defined by the follwing [ABNF](https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/std68):

!!! example "ISCC DID scheme ABNF"

    ```abnf
    iscc-did = "did:iscc:" iscc
    iscc     = 10*88(numbers / letters)
    numbers  = %x32-37  ; 2-7
    letters  = %x61-7A  ; a-z
    ```

1. The data structure of the ISCC is `<MainType><SubType><Version><Length><ISCC-BODY>`
2. The method specific identifier is a lower-cased base32 representation of the [ISCC structure](/iep-0001).
3. The regular expression for this DID method is `^did:iscc:[2-7a-z]{10,88}$`

### ISCC DID Example

!!! example "DID representation of an ISCC-ID"
    ```
    did:iscc:miagwptv4j2z57ci
    ```

## Method Operations

1. All operations are authorized by signed transactions of the controler.
2. An ISCC-DID is created by publicly declaring an ISCC-CODE in accordance with the [cross-chain declaration protocol](/iep-0013).
3. The initial controler of the DID document is the [did:pkh](https://github.com/w3c-ccg/did-pkh/blob/main/did-pkh-method-draft.md) representation of the blockchain account that signed the declaration transaction.
4. A basic DID document is automatically and deterministicaly derived from on-chain metadata.
5. The controller MAY set a custom DID Document by embedding or referencing it from [ISCC Metadata](https://schema.iscc.codes)
6. The DID Document MAY be updated or deactivated in accordence with the chain specific implementation of the declaration protocol.

## Resolving DIDs

1. An ISCC DID can be resolved by querying an instantiation of an [ISCC content registry](https://github.com/iscc/iscc-registry).
2. The authenticity of the response can be verified through the referenced on-chain metadata.

## Security & Privacy Consideration

An ISCC DID document need not contain a proof property. All operations are authenticated with the 
signature of the transaction payload sent to the network of the originating ledger. 
This signature is generated using a key specified in the corresponding DID Document.


